Add purls (Package URLs) to `PackageRecord` (#63)
conda/ceps: cep-purls.md

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Add package-urls to PackageRecord </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Bas Zalmstra &lt;bas@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Nov 23, 2023</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Nov 23, 2023</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> NA </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

> This CEP describes a change to the `PackageRecord` format and the corresponding `repodata.json` file to include `purls` (Package Urls) of repackaged packages to identify packages across multiple ecosystems.

Author: Unfortunately, I believe that atm there is no actual "authorative" source. 

There is this relatively old definition of a `RepoDataRecord`: https://github.com/conda/schemas/blob/main/repodata-record-1.schema.json

There is this new effort to document the schemas better (https://github.com/conda/schemas/pull/26) where it's also called `RepoDataRecord`: https://github.com/conda/schemas/blob/b143c82a71833570fbe9be2313368b33c0e84726/conda_models/package_record.py#L23

And we have the definition in rattler: https://docs.rs/rattler_conda_types/latest/rattler_conda_types/struct.PackageRecord.html

In rattler (and I believe in conda as well), there is this distinction:

* `PackageRecord`: contains all the fields for a single entry in the `repodata.json`
* `RepoDataRecord`: inherits all fields from `PackageRecord` and adds fields to identify the origin of the data (channel, url, etc.)
* `PrefixRecord`: inhertis all fields from `RepoDataRecord` and additionally stores information about how the package was installed.

> This CEP describes a change to the `PackageRecord` format and the corresponding `repodata.json` file to include `purls` (Package Urls) of repackaged packages to identify packages across multiple ecosystems.

Reviewer: Yea, I think the most "official" source for this is https://github.com/conda/conda/blob/e783377439ed1c413c6bffb9b785ae1d79c2392a/conda/models/records.py#L247. That module also offers some sort of definition in the top-level docstring.

## Specification

> We propose to add the optional `purls: [string]` field to `PackageRecord`.

Reviewer 2: As @jaimergp mentioned, we should also mention in this CEP where in the built conda package this should live and where it is specifiable in the recipe.
IMO, `index.json` is a good fit for it as IMO, it should also go into repodata (at least into sharded).

Adding it to `index.json` will lead to `conda-index` automatically adding it to `repodata.json`. This is IMO a bad default in `conda-index`; it should instead just keep a whitelist of things to put into `repodata.json` instead of putting everything from `index.json` in there.

To identify the repackaged package we use [PURL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/) (Package URL), which implements a scheme for identifying packages that is meant to be portable across packaging ecosystems.

```json
{
  ...
  "pinject-0.14.1-pyhd8ed1ab_0.tar.bz2": {
    "name": "pinject",
    "version": "0.14.1",
    "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"],
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

> PURL is already supported by dependency-related tooling like SPDX (see [External Repository Identifiers in the SPDX 2.3 spec](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/external-repository-identifiers/#f35-purl)), the [Open Source Vulnerability format](https://ossf.github.io/osv-schema/#affectedpackage-field), and the [Sonatype OSS Index](https://ossindex.sonatype.org/doc/coordinates); not having to wait years before support in such tooling arrives is valuable.

Reviewer: I would also mention [PEP-725](https://peps.python.org/pep-0725/) (WIP).

## Motivation

Conda packages can repackage packages from other ecosystems.
Conda-forge and other channels famously repackages a lot of PyPI packages.
However, without actually downloading the conda package and inspecting its contents there is no reliable way to know whether a certain conda package is a repackaged package.

Pixi and conda-lock are both tools that try to combine the conda and PyPI package ecosystem but this is hard to do because conda package names and PyPI package names do not necessarily match up.

Its hard to use open-source vulnerability databases because they often do not contain conda packages.
Using the PURL standard allows us to link vulnerabilities from other ecosystems to conda package.

## Rationale

Adding the information to the `repodata.json` file has some advantages:

* We can keep this information close to the conda package description.
* We can incrementally add `purls` through repodata patches.

> The downside is that the (already large) repodata.json file will grow.

Reviewer: What if we add a separate-yet-adjacent `purls.json` like we did with `run_exports.json` in CEP-12?

Author: I think we should just include them with sharded repodata but for backwards compatibility it seems logic to go the same route as run exports as well (also allowing patching them).

## Specification

We propose to add the optional `purls: [string]` field to `PackageRecord`.
To identify the repackaged package we use [PURL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/) (Package URL), which implements a scheme for identifying packages that is meant to be portable across packaging ecosystems.

```json
{
  ...
  "pinject-0.14.1-pyhd8ed1ab_0.tar.bz2": {
    "name": "pinject",
    "version": "0.14.1",
    "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"],
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

PURL is already supported by dependency-related tooling like SPDX (see [External Repository Identifiers in the SPDX 2.3 spec](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/external-repository-identifiers/#f35-purl)), the [Open Source Vulnerability format](https://ossf.github.io/osv-schema/#affectedpackage-field), and the [Sonatype OSS Index](https://ossindex.sonatype.org/doc/coordinates); not having to wait years before support in such tooling arrives is valuable.
[PEP 725 (WIP)](https://peps.python.org/pep-0725) also proposes how to specify non-PyPi dependencies using PURLs.

> ### PURLs in recipes

Reviewer: I'd like to read recommendations on _which_ PURLs should be included, e.g.:

- Sources being built, seems obvious
- Vendored dependencies?
- Statically compiled libraries?

Reviewer 3: Continuing a riff from [zulip](https://conda-forge.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/457337-general/topic/PURL.20and.20CVE.20mapper/with/600049336) as to where to store PURLs in an artifact's `info/`:

> if not SBOM, maybe `/purls/{:pedigree}.txt` where pedigree is a [CDX value](https://cyclonedx.org/docs/1.7/json/#metadata_tools_oneOf_i0_components_items_pedigree)? (e.g. `ancestor`, usually exactly one, known at authoring time with `${{ version }}`, or `variant` which can probably only be known at build time in the general case).

Reviewer 4: @bollwyvl I think this should be the way to go indeed, because for CVE's the `variants` field could be very interesting. Especially in cases like https://github.com/conda-forge/libpng-feedstock/blob/00d42af47191ac863343a6a8142a596ca069c192/recipe/recipe.yaml#L12 where we cannot map cleanly to a "source PURL" so to speak. 

In that sense we could use a `variant` like debian or something to piggyback on the vulnerabilities. However, the wording for CDX is:

> Variants describe relations where the relationship between the components is not known. For example, if Component A contains nearly identical code to Component B. They are both related, but it is unclear if one is derived from the other, or if they share a common ancestor.

I guess that in my debian libpng example, the ancestor is known to be the same. So not sure if we are using the field "technically" correct in that sense. :)

> PURLs can be specified in the recipe under `.about.purls` (implementation for [v1-recipes](cep-00014.md): [prefix-dev/rattler-build #1664](https://github.com/prefix-dev/rattler-build/pull/1664)):

Reviewer: Let's use RFC language here:

```suggestion
PURLs MAY be specified in the recipe under `.about.purls` (implementation for [v1-recipes](cep-00014.md): [prefix-dev/rattler-build #1664](https://github.com/prefix-dev/rattler-build/pull/1664)):
```

```yaml
about:
  # ...
  # PURLs that this package belongs to

>   purls: [string (PURL enforced)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  purls: [string (PURL enforced)]
```

What do you mean by "PURL enforced"? Should we add some language like:

> The strings in the `purls` field MUST be valid PURL identifiers.

```

Tools that build conda packages should add these packages to `index.json`:

```json
{
  ...,
  "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"]
}
```

### PURLs in repodata

> In `repodata.json`, PURLs should be an optional field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `repodata.json`, PURLs SHOULD be an optional field.
```

> Tools that generate `repodata.json` (like `rattler-index` or `conda-index`) can decide whether to include it or not in `repodata.json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools that generate `repodata.json` (like `rattler-index` or `conda-index`) MAY decide whether to include it or not in `repodata.json` and derivatives.
```

> Instead of writing the PURLs in `repodata.json`, these tools can decide to add PURLs to a separate `purls.json` like in [CEP 12](cep-0012.md):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of writing the PURLs in `repodata.json`, these tools MAY add PURLs to a separate `purls.json` file, like in [CEP 12](cep-0012.md), with the following schema:
```

```json
{
  "info": {
    "platform": "string",

>     "arch": "string",

Reviewer: I think these are superfluous here.

    "subdir": "string",
    "version": 0
  },
  "packages": {
    "package-version-build.tar.bz2": {
      ...,
      "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"]
    }
  },
  "packages.conda": {
    "package-version-build.conda": {
      ...,
      "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"]
    }
  }
}
```

> If the `purls` field is not present in the `repodata.json` record, it means no `purls` information is stored with the record. Then, a fallback mechanism (i.e., read `purls.json`) should be used to acquire the PURL information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `purls` field is not present in the `repodata.json` record, it means no `purls` information is stored with the record. Then, a fallback mechanism (i.e., read `purls.json`) SHOULD be used to acquire the PURL information.
```

> In sharded repodata ([CEP 16](cep-0016.md)), PURLs can be specified similar to [CEP 21](cep-0021.md).

Reviewer: Can you elaborate here with an example?

### Patching

> With the purls part of the repodata we propose to also allow repodata patching this field. The original purls can still be extracted from the packages in `index.json`. We do not see a reason how the PURL information is different from other patchable information stored in the repodata (like the dependencies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the purls part of the repodata we propose to also allow repodata patching this field. The original purls can still be extracted from the packages in `index.json`. We do not see a reason how the PURL information is different from other patchable information stored in the repodata (like the dependencies).
```

I'm not sure we want to dynamically alter a field that might end up being used to generate SBOMs and other types of audit-related data. I need to think about this.

To facilitate these patches, the `patch_instructions_version` in `patch_instructions.json` files is incremented to `3`. A `patch_instructions_version: 3` file MAY contain a `purls: ...` field in the patch instructions that MUST be used to patch generated the `purls` entry in the (sharded) repodata (or the `purls.json`).

```json
{
  "patch_instructions_version": 3,
  "packages": {
    "package-version-build.tar.bz2": {
      ...,
      "purls": ["pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1"]
    },
    ...
  }
}
```

> ### PURL of a conda packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### PURL of a conda package
```

> ### PURL of a conda packages

Reviewer: I think this section deserves its own CEP.

Reviewer: xref https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/159

> Conda packages itself should have a PURL as well.
> This makes it possible for CVE Numbering Autorities (CNA) to publish vulnerabilities for conda packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conda packages itself MAY have a PURL as well. This makes it possible for CVE Numbering Autorities (CNA) to publish vulnerabilities for conda packages. This section defines the conventions followed to generate such an identifier.
```

> A package `pinject-0.14.1-pyh29332c3_1.conda` published on `conda-forge` should have the PURL `pkg:conda/conda-forge/pinject@0.14.1?build=pyh29332c3_1&platform=noarch`.

Reviewer 5: Should we worry that this diverges from https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/PURL-TYPES.rst#conda? This seems to be quite problematic IMO. In the spec, channel is a specifier (`pkg:conda/pinject@0.14.1?channel=conda-forge`).

Reviewer: Yes, for now we need to stick to the PURL spec (even if I'm not a big fan of how they are currently defining the `conda` type). Changes like the ones proposed here need to happen there first, if needed.

Reviewer: I asked the PURL team today about how to submit changes to their spec, and right now they are focused on some large rearrangements of the specification (a centralized schema for type definitions and tests), so it's bad timing to submit type-specific (e.g `conda`) changes. But later this year this work will be done so type-specific feedback will be welcome by then. I'll stay in touch with them to monitor the situation and report once we can submit some actionable items. In the meantime, we can brainstorm as a community what we'd like to propose to the standard.

Reviewer 3: > some large rearrangements

Yep, this is handled authoritatively in:

https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/types/conda-definition.json

I don't like this:

```yaml
"namespace_definition": {
    "note": "there is no namspace",
    "requirement": "prohibited"
  },
```

... cuz, yeah, all `$CONDA_EXE` _are_ namespace-aware, and e.g. `bioconda`/`conda-forge` packages don't map 1:1. That being said, this section could be collapsed down to a reference to that spec file.

> Packages can also specify a custom `repository_url`, for example `pkg:conda/custom-channel/my-package@0.1.0?build=pyh29332c3_1&platform=noarch&repository_url=prefix.dev`.

Reviewer 5: If I'm not mistaken, `repository_url` should be an actual URL, not a domain name: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/PURL-SPECIFICATION.rst#known-qualifiers-keyvalue-pairs

>repository_url is an extra URL for an alternative, non-default package repository or registry. When a package does not come from the default public package repository for its type a purl may be qualified with this extra URL. The default repository or registry of a type is documented in the "Known purl types" section.

> Tools that generate packages like rattler-build and conda-build should also be able to inject a PURL at build time via CLI flags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools that generate packages like rattler-build and conda-build SHOULD provide an option to inject a PURL at build time via CLI flags.
```

> For this, v1-recipes can use the jinja syntax from the recipes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, v1-recipes MAY use the Jinja syntax from the recipes.
```

```bash
rattler-build build -r recipe/ \
    --append-purl-pattern \

>     'pkg:conda/conda-forge/${{ PACKAGE_NAME }}@${{ PACKAGE_VERSION }}?build=${{ BUILD_NUMBER }}'

Reviewer: I don't see why we need to inject the PURL of the package being built into itself. All this information can be derived from the filename if we want to publish it somewhere else, but I don't see how publishing an easily buildable string adds value.

Also, the `build` qualifier is the build _string_ not the number.

```

> Variables that are available in the build process (like `PACKAGE_NAME`, `PACKAGE_VERSION` and `BUILD_NUMBER`) can be specified here.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this one yet. We need some way of adding the PURL to conda-forge packages.

An alternative would be to enforce with conda-smithy that something like this is always in the recipe:

```yml
about:
  purls:
    - pkg:pypi/pinject@0.14.1
    - pkg:conda/conda-forge/${{ name }}@${{ version }}?build=${{ build }}
```

this would be a bit more explicit. But we would not be easily able to add things like `&platform=osx-arm64`

Passing it through the infrastructure via CLI flags makes sure it's correct and would immediately apply to each new build though.

## Motivation

Conda packages can mostly repackage packages from other ecosystems.
Conda-forge and other channels famously repackages a lot of PyPI packages.

> However, without actually downloading the conda package and inspecting its contents there is no reliable way to know whether a certain conda package is a repackaged package.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, without actually downloading the conda package and inspecting its contents there is no reliable way to know whether a certain conda package is a repackaged package and which package it repackages.
```
?

Tools like pixi or conda-lock try to combine conda and PyPI packages through heuristics. This doesn't work deterministically as package names between the two indices may differ.

Its hard to use open-source vulnerability databases because they often do not contain conda packages.

> Using the PURL standard allows us to link vulnerabilities from other ecosystems to conda package.

Reviewer: I would move this above Specification so it's clear _why_ we are doing this. It would also need some more details about the intended usage and benefits, since there are many!
